Yeah.
Rob. No, it's not a name. It wasn't the budget.
I think
they're called robins. What's the name?
We'll call lots of things.
Morning, Minister.
Good morning.
Morning, Ian. Good morning. Glad to have you all with us this morning.
We'll hand over to you for some opening comments, and then we'll get into it.
Well, good morning, Mr. Chair, and good morning, committee members.
Great to be with you this morning. With me at the table today is Ian Rennie, the
Secretary of the Treasury, and I believe Chris Bunny, the Deputy Secretary, is
just behind me, as well as relevant officials from the Treasury,
who are here to help with your questions if need be.
As the Chair has permitted, I'll make some brief introductory remarks.
On budget day, people focus on new spending, which is perfectly
understandable. It is important to remember, however, that this is only a
portion of total government spending, just as an iceberg has a
visible portion above water and a large bulk underneath it.
Next year, core Crown expenses in total, that full
iceberg, will total around 155 billion, over
70% of which will go to health, education, welfare, and
superannuation. Another 6% will go to servicing
the government's debt.
And that all adds up to a big number.
Core Crown revenue, mostly from taxpayers, will be around 145
billion. So there is a $10 billion difference between those two
numbers. That is the deficit, and we will have to borrow to
meet it. In comparison, the amounts we focus on in the budget,
like net new discretionary spending of $2.1 billion,
are relatively small. But that is the point.
The government's approach is to keep new budget spending tight,
forcing a hard look at the underlying 150-odd
billion of spending, 150-odd billion, to see where this money could
be better spent. And better spent for this government
almost always means spending it on our priority areas
of health, education, law and order, defense, and
infrastructure.
Keeping a tight rein on discretionary new spending and
reprioritizing across government means we are continuing to
invest in frontline public services, providing temporary,
timely, and targeted funding to respond to the fuel crisis, and
maintaining a pipeline of infrastructure investments.
And at the same time, we are repairing the government's books.
That repair is necessary because there has been a long period of
operating deficits and growing debt, and that situation will
not resolve itself automatically as the economy recovers.
Specifically, the government is aiming through its fiscal strategy to
reduce core Crown expenses towards 30% of GDP, to
return the headline operating balance measure, OBERGAL X, to surplus by the
'28, '29 fiscal year, and to put net core
Crown debt as a percentage of GDP on a downward
trajectory towards 40%.
Members are aware that Treasury's recommended net debt ceiling is
50% of GDP, and that seems to have bipartisan
support, or at least it used to. We are aiming for
40% because the ceiling should never be the target.
History shows that one economic shock on its own can push up debt
by 20% GDP.
That is precisely the point of having moderate amounts of debt, so
it can increase significantly in a crisis or a shock, but
not cripple the country with unmeetable debt servicing
costs. But once that buffer is used, it
does have to be restored again. So how are we tracking
against our fiscal goals? The Treasury's budget forecasts
show core Crown expenses falling to 30.3% of
GDP by the end of the forecast period, well on the way to
the 30% target.
OBERGAL X is forecast to return to surplus in the '28,
'29 target year, and that is a year earlier than previously
expected in the half-year update.
And net core Crown debt is forecast to peak at
46.1% of GDP in the '27, '28 fiscal year,
again, lower than at the half-year update, then decline to
44.4% of GDP by the end of the forecast period.
In other words, the debt curve finally stops going up and
starts going down. We are making progress on the debt
mountain.
This improvement in the books is reflected in the government's borrowing program.
New Zealand Debt Management has lowered its forecast issuance of government
bonds by $6 billion over the next four years.
This is, members, the first downward revision to the bond program since
2021.
There've been a lot of headwinds to the government's fiscal strategy over the last
two and a half years from external economic events over which we
have no control. Despite this, the fiscal
strategy remains on track, and that's because the government
has taken care with public money and made what are tough choices.
Since this is election year, the next round of forecasts will be in the PREFU,
the Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Update.
I can announce today that the PREFU will be on Tuesday the 29th
of September. That is in the week after the House rises, and
is five and a half weeks before the election. I'm happy to take your questions.
Thank you, Minister. We've got Barbara Ann first.
Good morning, Minister. I do acknowledge this is your third budget, and to Ian
Rennie and the team,
I totally acknowledge that difficult budget to put together given the
uncertainties.
Minister, just having a look at between Budget '24 and '26,
how many more people are on the job seeker benefit or emergency
benefit between those two forecast periods?
So the place to look is if you go to
the, um-
The budget
economic fiscal update, I think, has the table.
Certainly, I have the table available here.
So,
yeah. Thank you, Mr. Rennie. So, if we look at
the numbers, they are on page 116 of the BFOU.
And if we look at the actual numbers for the reference year that you gave was
2024, their numbers on JobSeeker support and
emergency benefit were 194,000. As
we are here today, the actuals in 2025 were
217, and the forecast for '26 is
227,000.
Yeah. So 98,000 extra. So what's the fiscal cost
of 98,000 people on the job seeker's benefit
across the period to 2028?
Well, again, if you look at the table above that, the welfare benefit expenses,
in the BFOU, that sets that out. And I think it
is clear to everyone that reducing unemployment has not
only a fiscal cost but a significant social cost, and it
is the objective of this government that we have as many New
Zealanders in work as possible. Which is why we are very
pleased that in these forecasts, we are forecasting
220,000 jobs being added to the economy over the forecast period.
We're forecasting that while unemployment will peak,
partly worsened by the fuel crisis, will peak this year.
It is forecast to continue to reduce throughout the forecast period.
And that is positive for every New Zealander who will have a job, their families
who will be supported through that job and independent income, and it is positive
for the government books.
So perhaps, maybe then for Treasury, what is the fiscal cost?
Well, it's very clearly set out-
Does that include-
... Ms. Munce. You can see that in the table welfare
benefit expenses, which has the costs of the various benefits, including
New Zealand Superannuation, JobSeeker, and emergency benefit.
And those costs are set out in the table above.
So,
the numbers are available for you.
Does that include the accommodation supplement allowance,
winter energy payments, additional Working for Families?
Yes. That table sets out very specifically the amount expected to go
into accommodation assistance, the amount expected to go into Working for Families
tax credits and other tax credits, noting this government
has made some changes to some of those entitlements.
Specifically,
we have increased the maximum accommodation allowance that can be
paid to families receiving it. Also, of course, we
made a significant decision in our first budget to unwind the
indexing of benefits to wages, which had been a decision by the
previous government. We chose instead to index them to
inflation, which has reduced the cost of those
benefits.
So as part of your budget, I think it was last year for
Investment Boost, you said that it was going to-
Sorry, is this a new primary?
It's part of the jobs question.
Okay.
You said that it was going to increase, I think, 240,000 jobs, and this year it's
220,000. Is that correct?
In the BFOU last year, we predicted that over
that forecast period, which is, of course, a different forecast period from
that in this year's BFOU necessarily.
We forecast that over that forecast period, 240,000 jobs would be
created. In this BFOU, as we look ahead over a different forecast
period, we're looking at 220,000 jobs being created in the New Zealand
economy. And I think that that is positive.
It shows that there will be new opportunities for New Zealanders, both those
currently in work
looking to get a new job opportunity, and those who are
currently out of the workforce. And you do see that the unemployment number
correlates, that it reduces over that forecast period.
So what is the increase in the working-age
population over that same period?
I don't have those numbers right here, but what
we do have is a
breakdown of those numbers I'm sure that we can make available to you.
You would expect that there would be an increase in the working-age population over
that period.
And sorry, I'm still going. That's all right.
How many of those jobs are because of the decisions made in Budget 2026?
So directly related to budget decisions as opposed to private
market-
Well, these things are very-
... population moves
... as the member appreciates, these things are very difficult to
disaggregate because
the effect of overall employment levels is a
combination of what's happening with the underlying population, what's
happening with underlying economic growth,
and at the margin, there is also the effect of welfare policies.
It is the case that where governments don't provide adequate
incentives for people to move from welfare into work, then you could expect
structurally higher levels of unemployment.
It is also the case that policies such as Investment Boost, which
in the Treasury and IRD's estimation will increase overall potential
growth, that with higher overall growth comes more job
creation. It's also the case that the investment in infrastructure projects
and the view of the Infrastructure Commission for every billion dollars of public
investment per year in infrastructure, around
4,500 jobs are created.
And it is the case fundamentally that where an economy is growing and
businesses have the confidence to invest either in hiring new
staff, expanding into a new market internationally,
expanding their business here at home, that with that growth
comes new job opportunities. Which is why, as a government, we have
focused on a going for growth agenda because we know that the best thing
that we can do to support more job creation is to overall
grow the economy faster.
So then why have employment forecasts been revised down since the last budget
by 82,000 fewer people forecast to be employed in '25,
'26?
There've been a few events in the Middle East which I'd draw the member's attention
to.
82,000-
In particular,
we have seen a global oil shock that, in the view of the International Energy
Agency, is the most extreme the world has ever experienced.
That has led to significant effects for the New Zealand economy.
First of all, a downgrading in global growth, including from our trading
partners. It has also led to a supply shock in prices,
which for New Zealanders they're already experiencing at the pump, and is
viewed to increase inflationary pressure, therefore meaning
a more contractionary monetary policy stance than may otherwise be the case.
New Zealand is not immune to international events, and there have been significant
international events since the last budget update.
So the budget also forecast shows that real
wage being negative. Why is that?
Well, because of the international fuel crisis,
which is expected in the immediate future to lift
inflationary pressure significantly.
What those forecasts also show is that over the forecast period,
real wage growth is expected to accelerate and overall be
positive.
So at 77,000-
Sorry, last one
... year '27, 72,000 year '28. Treasury
says in their BEFU that it's short-term, the impact from
that conflict. How can you reconcile that from your last statement?
Sorry, how can I reconcile what?
From your last statement. So you've just said in your last statement because of the
conflict-
Yes
... year '27 it's less than 77,000.
'28 it's less than 72,000. It's fewer by 72,000.
How does that reconcile with-
Are you talking about job numbers?
Yes.
Because there are always, in an economy, lag effects
between an economic shock and the impact on different
indicators. It is an orthodox economic
view that when you have a price shock, and therefore a
growth shock, that the last indicator to recover
typically is unemployment. And so Treasury have applied
a very orthodox forecasting model in which they expect
that as inflation is brought under control and growth recovers,
you will then see employment levels recover and unemployment
levels recover.
Thank you. We've got a new primary from Dan Goodwill.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks, Minister, and to your team at the Treasury for coming
before us today.
Welcome.
I want to turn the attention to New Zealand's debt position.
Mm-hmm.
As we know from table one, debt's currently
191 billion. As a proportion of the economy, it-
I've got a voice
... peaks in '27, '28.
Mm-hmm.
How worried are you about New Zealand's debt position, and how worried
do you think New Zealanders should be about our debt position?
Well, our debt position is materially different from what it has
been historically. It tripled in nominal terms
following COVID.
Yep.
Doubled as a proportion of the economy.
And for reference, if you look back, Bill English, Michael Cullen, you can pick a
blue or a red finance minister. The orthodox position was to keep debt under
20% of GDP, and it is now far above that.
The thing that's very material, I think, for members to understand is the debt
servicing cost that comes with that on an annual basis and the opportunity
cost that represents. So I'd draw members' attention to page
115 of the BEFU, which outlines core Crown expenses and
shows that this year, debt servicing costs are
forecast to be $9 billion. Now,
obviously, that far overshadows any
discretionary additional spending decisions the government has made in this budget.
It's more than four times our overall operating allowance.
To put that number into context, it is enough to fund a year's
operations of the defense force, the police force, the customs
service, the corrections service, the justice system.
So it is a significant amount of money, and every dollar spent on servicing
debt is a dollar not available to be invested in our health system, our education
system, and public infrastructure.
And so it has been the view of successive governments, and certainly the
view of this government, that ensuring that we get debt down to manageable levels
is important,
not just for our resilience in the world, but also for ensuring that we have
manageable debt servicing costs.
Good. Next question is what feedback you're getting
from ratings agencies,
bond holders, bond issuers, or bond
purchasers around the
current government's approach on
fiscal strategy.
Well, both Moody's Ratings and Fitch Ratings
have looked at New Zealand's debt and deficit
positions and have said that it is essential that we keep to the
fiscal strategy, and track a credible path back to
surplus and debt reduction. They've put us on a negative outlook, which is to
say they've retained our current credit rating, which
is a good one because it has material effects for the cost of
borrowing internationally. But they've said that it is incredibly
important that we show progress on our fiscal
strategy of reducing deficits and debt.
If we don't do that,
what is likely to occur is that those credit rating agencies
would downgrade our credit rating.
And of course, many New Zealanders will have experienced what a downgraded
credit rating means.
What it essentially means is it's harder to borrow and more expensive to
borrow. And so for New Zealand, that would be very material.
It would mean more of the taxpayer dollars that we collect would have to go into
servicing debt rather than investing in the future that we're all trying to
create. So maintaining a prudent position
in the eyes of the credit rating agencies is important actually
for how much it costs to borrow, for the interest rates we pay, not only as the
government, but also that New Zealand businesses and private
borrowers pay. So we do take their
estimations of our books very seriously.
And final question is you've had to make some tough decisions in this budget, but
also the previous budgets.
Mm-hmm.
Can you give us a sense of if you hadn't have Taking those
decisions, what would be the potential impact on
debt interest and potential outlook from rating
agencies?
Yeah. Look, colleagues will be aware that the approach we have
taken across three budgets is to supplement
our operating allowances with a significant program of
reprioritization and saving. And that has been
necessary to keep up with the growing costs that are very real
in our health system, our education system, the very real needs to
invest in infrastructure for the future.
We continue to have an infrastructure deficit in New Zealand, and this government
is determined to repair it. And so, in order to
support those objectives, we have made over three budgets, $50
billion worth of reprioritizations.
And it is simply the case that in the absence of that, you would be
adding $50 billion worth of spending to all of the
numbers in these books. It would mean that the deficits would be far
deeper. It would mean that the debt would be far larger-
Mm
... and the debt servicing costs would be much higher.
I'd wager also that we would be in a position as an economy
where inflation would be higher, and where interest rates would be
higher, too.
Mm.
And, I would note that decisions in the
past by previous governments not to rein in its spending,
materially contributed to very high inflation rates, which stayed out
of target for 33 months in a row, contributed to one of the
steepest increases in the interest rate path that New Zealanders have
experienced, and very much led materially to the cost of living
challenges that we are still working to unwind today.
Thank you.
Thank you. This seems to be a hot topic.
We've got a few supplementaries, first from Chloe and then Barbara Edmonds.
So Minister, I have a parliamentary written question from you in which I asked what
the revenue impact of the failed ETS auctions would be.
Mm.
And you said, and I quote, "The sale of units through ETS auctions does not have an
impact on revenue. The Crown receives cash proceeds from the sale of ETS
units."
Mm-hmm.
"When auctions are forecast to clear and subsequently fail to, this
results in lower than forecast cash proceeds with a corresponding impact on net
core Crown debt." Can I confirm that your understanding as Minister of Finance is
therefore that the failure of ETS auctions results in the Crown taking on more
debt?
So there's two things happening here.
The first is when ETS units
sell at auction,
yes, that has a cash impact. On the other side, the
sale of a unit also creates a liability for the Crown-
Understood
... which is reflected in the balance sheet.
So, there's a very equal and opposite reaction.
While you get a cash positive impact, you get a liability negative impact
on the other side. The point that you are making about
the cash picture is real, and of course-
Yeah
... it is across all areas of government forecasts that there can be
differences between what is forecast and what eventuates,
and the Treasury always updates that in each of
its updates.
So to that effect, we have looked across the failure of all of the ETS
auctions in the past term of government, and we've compared forecast NZU
cash with receipts with actuals. And what we have come to the conclusion
of is that there's an approximate $1.4 billion increase in debt
that has been taken on as a result of the failure of the ETS auctions.
Does that correspond with your understanding?
Well, I think the simple point that I am working to make to you again,
is that that has also, on the other side, been balanced
out by a commensurate reduction in Crown
liability. So you cannot look at one without
the other. If those auctions had cleared at that price, the Crown's
liability would be higher. So yes, there has been a reduction in cash receipts,
but on the other hand, there has been a reduction in Crown liability.
I also would note
that it's very unclear to me whether the member is saying that the Crown should
intervene in the ETS market to
somehow set a higher price for the auction, which is the
necessary flow on from what she's saying.
Not at all.
And it's our view that actually the operation of the ETS- ...
in a predictable manner is quite important.
And the Crown
has very limited in its ability to affect that price by
intervening in the market.
Just to be clear, Minister, about said member's position.
Mm.
It is that we should have a credible ETS market.
Mm-hmm.
Something which many market players, experts have provided commentary on over the
past two years stating that government policy has resulted in undermining of
confidence in the emissions trading scheme, resulting in the failures of those
ETS auctions. That is my position. That is the position of said market.
The other point that I would make is that I very much understand the correspondence
between liabilities and those cash proceeds.
Mm-hmm.
But the point that you were making in your previous answers was that
increased debt also comes with increased debt servicing.
So therefore, are you not concerned with the increase in debt that has
resulted as a result of these failure of ETS auctions?
My point is that the liability is reduced on the other side.
I think I've made that clearly.
Okay, we've got another supplementary from Barbara Edmonds.
Yeah, just very simply, how much has net core
Crown debts grown on average during the period
2017 and '23, and what are the forecasts between '23 and
'28?
So I would turn the member to my favorite table in the
BEEFA-
Same. It's my favorite, too
... which I have many copies of printed, which is
at the very back, and that is the time series of fiscal and
economic indicators,
which goes through all of those measures, including core
Crown debt,
and shows that core Crown debt,
in percentage terms, was in
2020-
4, 41.7% in
2025. The only year for which we
have full numbers for this government is
41.9%. It is forecast in '26 to reach
42.4. And look, I'll save the members the delight
of me reading out the rest of the row, but it is all set out very clearly there.
Yeah. So
my understanding from the table at the back, which is, again, my favorite too,
that as-
Mm-hmm
... a percentage of GDP, excluding New Zealand Super, it's risen from
33.9% to 44.8% between those two
fiscal periods that I asked about.
Are you-
Sorry, what is risen by that?
From '23 to '28.
So what-
44.8%
... which measure are you talking about?
Sorry?
Which measure are you talking about?
I'm talking about GDP. It's percent of GDP, net core Crown debt.
Right.
So net core Crown debt-
'23 is-
Net core Crown debt in 2023 was-
...
38.6
33.9, excluding New Zealand Super.
Yes.
Well-
So just my question being-
Mm
... given that it's risen from, my understanding, 33.9% to
44.8%
Mm-hmm
... just understanding the assumptions underlying that for that change.
Yeah. So, in terms of net core Crown debt,
the key issue that we are having to deal with is threefold.
One, as I set out in my opening remarks, the gap
between current spending and revenue.
Now, there have been material impacts on that due to the
delayed recovery that the New Zealand economy has experienced.
Two, significant debt servicing costs, which the government has had
to meet, which go far beyond what the previous government was having to
meet due to the larger amounts of debt that our government inherited.
Three, demographic pressures, which have meant that the cost of New Zealand
superannuation is rising by hundreds of millions of dollars
each year.
Table.
A table that I think is quite helpful is if members have the fiscal
strategy report with them.
We went to some effort to set out on page
22 what has gone into the changes in the
deficit forecast between Pre-FUBT '23 and PFUT
'26.
Colleagues will recall it's been well canvassed that there was a
significant downward revision following the overly optimistic
forecast provided in Pre-FUBT 2023.
But what that table also sets out is that many of
the changes that occurred in the deficit position were essentially to do
with underlying economic conditions being different than had been forecast.
Even if you exclude policy decisions to
reduce taxation on working people, tax revenue reduced
significantly over that period. But what you can also
see is that deliberate government decisions to reduce budget
packages and allowances has had a material
improvement to the size of the government deficit.
Which is to say, in the absence of the deliberate decisions by this government, the
deficits would've been far larger, the debt position would be far larger.
Okay, we've got still on supplementaries, Dr. David Wilson.
Yes. Thank you, Minister, for that explanation.
You said it a little bit earlier that we can't outgrow this, and we're just talking
about net core Crown debt-
Mm
... currently at around 41.9 and bouncing around the mid-40s right through to
2030.
Mm.
So can you put those two things together for us?
And also in terms of that outlook, we're looking at nominal
GDP already starting to rise and real GDP as well.
Mm.
So that kind of indicates growth. Can you sort of tell us what you mean when you
say we can't outgrow this?
Well, first of all, just let me be very clear that we
absolutely want growth, and we are forecasting growth in
these budget forecasts. Growth will accelerate throughout the forecast period,
reaching 2.3% in the next fiscal year and 3.2% beyond
that. That's very positive. That growth brings jobs, higher
incomes, a real improvement in people's material circumstances.
Alongside it, it does help the government books in that along with greater
growth comes greater revenue for the government.
Also, reductions in some of the Crown's expenses.
So we essentially need to support fewer people on benefits when there's more growth
and more employment. At the same time, however, with
growth some expenses continue to grow.
So for example, the case of New Zealand superannuation,
that is pegged to the after-tax average wage.
So with growth, after-tax average wages will grow faster than would otherwise
be the case, and therefore New Zealand superannuation broadly
reflects growth across the broader economy.
So those expenses won't drop even if we're growing faster.
In fact, those expenses will grow faster too.
So there are different aspects to it.
And when I say that growth alone won't resolve the
deficit, what I mean is that we will need to continue to
trim back areas of spending in order to bring our
books back into balance. That even if you layer over very high
levels of growth into these forecasts, you would still have a gap, which is why our
government has committed to an ongoing program of reprioritizations,
tight allowances, and very careful management of public money.
So you're saying that superannuation, as a percentage of GDP will rise?
Superannuation costs as a line item will continue to
grow even as the economy grows, and therefore create an
opportunity cost that there are less dollars elsewhere to be invested in health,
education, other areas.
So the answer to that was yes.
As a percentage of GDP, yes, we're expecting superannuation costs to continue to
rise.
Okay. Thank you. We've got a new primary from Chloe Swarbrick.
Are you committed to meeting our entire nationally determined contribution under
the Paris Agreement domestically?
Well, we remain committed to the Paris Agreement.
As the member is well aware, the Zero
Carbon Act sets out emission reduction goals which this
government is on track to meet.
Not true.
In an unfortunate event without- Parliamentary,
um, endorsement. The previous Minister for Climate Change,
James Shaw,
significantly increased New Zealand's
commitment under the Paris Agreement to our national
development contribution, well beyond what sits in our
zero carbon statute. And the cost of that
is significant. Um, and now the, the options
for the government to meet that obligation are both through domestic ema-
emission reduction efforts-
Mm-hmm
... or there is the potential, which some seem enamored by, of sending billions-
Absolutely not
... of dollars offshore
Quite the opposite
Um, and our preference has been to focus on domestic emission
reduction efforts.
If I can, Minister, you'll appreciate I only have so many minutes to ask you these
questions, so I'd really appreciate direct answers to these questions.
My question was, do you intend to meet the entire NDC domestically?
Yes or no.
We, we remain committed to the Paris Agreement.
Which means, as you alluded to in your own answer just then, that we either have
to do that through domestic action or through offshore mitigation.
Do you accept, therefore, that every time the government cuts domestic climate
action, that the offshore mitigation bill increases?
Uh, no, I don't think it's that black and white, and I think that we are one of
several countries who are not on track to meet the NDC.
Uh, that doesn't come into effect until 2030.
We don't currently have a legal liability to send, uh, billions of dollars
offshore, and I suspect that there will be many developments
globally a- about how NDCs are met and managed, uh, over the coming
years.
Are you implying there, Minister, that you expect the Paris Agreement to
effectively fall apart? And if so-
No
... what... Okay, so just, just to be clear then, what
developments... Can you give us any specificity?
What are these supposed developments that might occur?
If not, the basic mathematics, that if we have a nationally determined
contribution, we either have to meet that through domestic action or through
offshore mitigation, and those two things correspond.
If you decrease one, you increase the other.
Well, what I observe is that there are a number of countries
internationally-
Mm-hmm
... who are not on track to meet the NDC requirements-
... while also making good progress in reducing their emissions in their home
jurisdictions. Uh, I think that many of those countries will enter
discussions over the next few years about what that means in terms of
the Paris Agreement and how we collectively continue efforts globally, uh,
to reduce emissions. But in a way that also meets the very
real, pressing domestic concerns of a number of
nations. Which is to say, I do not think New Zealand is alone in
saying that it would not meet
the expectations of New Zealand taxpayers if we were to
send billions of dollars offshore, uh, to
meet the terms of a global agreement. Now, we, New Zealand is not alone in that.
Certainly, there are voters around the world who would feel very uncomfortable
about those sorts of choices. And so what I expect is that ongoing diplomatic
efforts will continue.
To be very clear-
Last sup, please.
Yeah, I guess just to be very clear, Minister, given that you've implied my
position many times in your answers there.
The Green Party very strongly-
I, I think I'll be read by my words rather than you, h- the implications you take
from things. 'Cause in my experience, the implications you take from things are
very different from the implications I take from things.
I would like to put my own words in my own mouth, which is-
Sure, you do that, and I'll do the same.
Uh, absolutely.
Great.
So I guess the final point that I would make, or rather the question that I was a-
I would ask, is do you think that it constitutes good economic
management to be making explicit commitments, particularly on the
international stage, that you are not budgeting for nor planning to
actually meet?
I'm very confident that the Treasury, uh, is meeting all of its
obligations in terms of the way that liabilities and commitments are
represented in the government books that has been assessed by the Auditor-General,
who concurs.
Thank you. Uh, we've got another supplementary on this from Dr. Deborah Russell.
Thank you, um, Ryan. Um, Minister, thank you for those comments.
Um, just in respect of this then, if we're not going to, um,
look at meeting our NDCs through buying offshore mitigation,
um, then we would be need, needing to do more onshore.
Yep.
Can you,
can you point to specific initiatives in this budget which will help
to reduce our emissions onshore?
Well, uh, the member, uh, is, um...
Uh, look, I'll just state it again clearly.
This government and this term of Parliament is not going to be
sending any money offshore to meet Paris-
Sure. So that was my, my question-
... obligations. In terms of emission reduction, as I set out in my answer
to, um, Chlöe Swarbrick, uh, we are on
track through our emission reduction plans to meet our
zero carbon targets.
That's not true.
And that is through a combination, uh, of activities by
the government. It is partly a result of the ETS and the price signals
that sends through the economy, uh, and it is partly through the emission
reduction efforts that are occurring across the economy.
With respect, Minister, the ETS is not sending sufficient signals at the moment,
um, given the price it's at. So what I was asking for was a very specific question
as to what
new initiatives, if any-
Mm
... that you can point to in this budget that go to reducing-
Yes
... our onshore emissions.
Absolutely. Well, the number one thing that I think, uh, matters is
the way that we are supporting the resource management system to
better consent, permit, and fast-track renewable energy
projects. Uh, specifically, there is, uh, a line item in
this budget to support, uh, a better Resource Management Act system
going forward. It has been the case that with the Fasttrack
Act, we have been able to bring on stream more solar and wind
development than occurred under the last government.
And what we want to see is a Resource Management Act that is able to do that in
normal times, not just with, uh, a Fasttrack Act, and we are investing in this
budget to support that. We also, in this budget, have
put forward a gas transition loan scheme, uh, which is to allow
for the fact, uh,
that many firms have faced spiking, uh, gas prices
as a result, uh, in part of the previous government's decision to
ban the exploration of oil and gas.
Uh, and so we are providing Crown-backed, uh, lending to support those
firms to transition, uh, in many cases, to electricity,
uh, which will largely be from renewable sources.
So a- again, with respect, Minister, um, the The previous government
had a fast track act that was also getting renewables built, and there were
renewables consent-
Not as fast as we've done, Deborah.
Well, there's nothing-
Well-
So that's a moot point. Those things were actually there-
Well, it's not moot. There's real solar panels and real windmills as a
result of our fast track act.
That's not true.
It's not moot.
It's a monster- I wonder if I could ask my question. Yeah. Thank you.
And with respect to gas, that's just using more of a fossil fuel, so it actually
adds to emission. So I'm still looking for something new that your government has
done that is reducing emissions.
Oh, sorry, I think you've misunderstood.
So the gas-
Oh, no, I-
... transition loan scheme is to assist firms who are
currently reliant on using gas for their processes-
I can see it
... to transition to other forms of energy use.
Many of them will make the choice to convert their
energy to electricity and renewable electricity.
So, materially, for many of those firms, that will
reduce their overall emission profile.
So it's a-
Less so.
Yeah, yeah. It's a real shame then that the giddy was cut because that was a very
specific effort.
No, that was corporate welfare, and I'm very pleased-
Oh, okay
... that we got rid of it.
Okay,
we've got-
Thank you, Minister.
We've got, Chloe's very keen for another supplementary.
Yeah, it was just to finish that NDC point.
So, I don't know if this is most appropriate either for the minister or for
Treasury, but you'll both obviously be aware that Treasury published a paper
looking at if we were to meet our NDCs, then that commitment will materialize at
approximately $5 billion out to 2030.
And I have parliamentary written questions from you, Minister.
I'd like to note that that paper is long for a reason, which
is that it has to fit in a lot of caveats.
And Minister, I have a parliamentary written question, or rather answer from you,
which stated, and many of these are answers stating that it
was, or you understood it to be Treasury's intention originally to publish this
paper alongside the BEFU.
Mm-hmm.
Can I understand what happened or what changed?
Why was this paper not published alongside the budget?
Yeah. So, the Treasury provided a copy of
that paper to my office ahead of the budget.
My office asked questions about the commercial and market sensitivity of it, the
readiness for me as the minister to answer questions about it on budget
day, and Treasury responded to that by judging that it would be
better to release it another day, but that the most important obligation they faced
was to ensure that the most up-to-date assessment of the fiscal risks that
that paper informed was reflected in the BEFU, which it
was. As you're aware, they published the full analysis soon after
the budget.
Very interesting.
Thank you. We've got a new primary now from Maxie P.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you, Minister.
We-
Sorry.
It was briefly asked in some of the supplementary questions around the
growing pressure of demographic changes in the future in New
Zealand. I
think this is it. About the growing pressure on demographic changes in New Zealand,
and particularly that comes around with
people with New Zealanders who are genuinely living longer, people who need some
healthcare services,
obviously a growing superannuation cost,
and everything else that is needed.
Now, I'm receiving a lot of comments from people in the community to say,
"Well, what's in this budget for the younger generation, the
younger New Zealanders of today?"
Mm.
When we hear what we hear is a tight budget, and what we
read is cutting
expenses in the budget. But what
is in the budget now that would give us a disciplined spending
that will continue to provide for a future that we can actually look into,
and what is this government doing for a better disciplined spending to grow the
New Zealand future for all New Zealanders?
Look, I think one of the most significant investments that any government can make,
in its future growth prospects and its young people, is through the
education system.
And this budget commits significant additional funds to the
We don't view that it's enough to just write bigger checks.
You also have to get better results for that.
We've had a real focus on lifting the focus on literacy and
numeracy in our primary schools. That's already getting really great results.
Mm.
I think excitingly,
what the evidence is showing so far is that the lifts in
achievement are actually greatest for those children who are coming
from the lower socioeconomic background.
So that is significant for all of our futures.
This budget focuses particular resources into the secondary school
system, both to redevelop the national qualification and the
curriculum that sits alongside it, but also to put a real
push on trades training, and I want to give credit to New Zealand
First here, who were instrumental in driving this package
forward.
Trades academies have been proven to be successful in terms of
kids who attend them being more likely to stay
and work, to find work, upon completing qualifications.
There's been huge demand for trades academies.
They essentially bring together workplace training, the
school curriculum, and employers.
And we are doubling the number of places in those trades academies through
this budget. We're also putting an additional investment into the Youth Guarantee
program. That program is essentially there to scoop up the kids who
did leave school without the basics that they need to even enter an apprenticeship.
They don't have qualifications. They don't have basic literacy and numeracy
skills. And the Youth Guarantee wraps extra support
around those young people into tertiary preparation
courses, foundation learning courses.
The other thing, of course, that we've invested in significantly in this budget, is
the health system. And I'd point you to a specific initiative,
which is close to my heart, which is about ensuring that mothers,
when they give birth, can have access to a three-day
postnatal stay, and that's something that we will be
rolling out progressively,
with a priority in the first instance on new mothers.
Thank you. We've got a supplementary from Barbara Edmonds on that.
Thank you. Minister, just to your response and referencing education,
I agree with the importance of investment in education.
But when you look at inflation that's forecast to be 4% this year, yet
real terms increase in spending-
To be fair, can I just, just for a correction, that's
what inflation is forecast to peak at
Yeah, this year. So operations funding for ECE is at
1.5%, that's potentially a 2.5% cut in real terms.
Operation fundings for schools, 2%, a potential 2% cut in
real terms. What do you expect ECE centers and schools to
cut?
Well, I think if you look back over previous budgets, even during the days when
Grant Robertson had the money bazooka out on full force-
Still pretty brutal
... you wouldn't see a correlation between the increase in operation grants and the
inflation rate. That hasn't historically been the case.
We don't just provide additional funding to schools through the operations
grant. We also provide support through professional development funding,
through teacher salary funding, through additional funding that goes
through a number of specific appropriations.
So I don't think it's appropriate to simply focus on the operations grant number.
In the case of early childhood education, the member will be aware that early
childhood education centers have a number of different arrangements.
Many of them are private businesses, and will choose how
they meet their costs and what that means for their profitability in their own
ways. We have also put significant additional
support into the early childhood education system through the Family Boost
program, which rebates parents, for the cost of their fees and
ensures that we are able to keep the cost of early childhood education affordable
for working families.
So, Minister, what is covered under operation funding?
Operation funding is a bulk grant that is made to schools based on
their rolls, and is intended to cover the costs of operating the school.
Like?
Electricity,
and other costs that they face.
Wages?
Wages are paid separately through a teacher salary grant.
And so what else is under operating funding?
Those are the costs of things like caretakers,
sometimes the cost of discretionary items, whether that's school
resources,
whether that's other materials that are needed to educate children.
And schools have considerable flexibility and choices about how they use those
grants.
I've got another supplementary from Dr. David Wilson.
Yes, just following up on the CPI inflation forecast of
4%. Some commentators say that's more of a
near-term peak and then forecast next year to go to 1.6%.
Mm.
What are your thoughts on that?
I think it's a very difficult time to be a forecaster.
As we've seen even in the past week,
as I looked it up today, Brent crude oil has now come below $80, which
is a long way south of the peaks more than $130 that we've
experienced in recent weeks. And essentially what
forecasters are trying to predict is what's going to happen with the international
oil price, and therefore what will inflation be.
It is the case that a lower oil price means lower prices at the
pump and less inflationary pressure in the economy.
So it is in all of our interests that that international oil price not only
come down but stay down, and that will be the most material input
for the overall inflation figures that we see for the New Zealand economy.
So you think we're on track for 1.6 next year?
I will hand over to my forecasters to make judgment on that.
Was there a prediction?
Look, I think as of today,
we're broadly comfortable with the forecasts that we had
in BFU.
But I would underscore the point that the minister made is, I'm sure there will
be lots of
potholes in the road ahead. We are not by any
means complacent. So while we
actually think that is a real outcome in 12 months' time-
Mm
... I think we just have to see how the water flows under the bridge
or through the straits.
Through the straits. Mm.
Through the straits, indeed. Yeah.
Thanks. Got another quick sup from Barbara.
Just really quick, Ian. Is there a way for
Treasury to make the forecasting a little bit easier for you?
Because obviously you closed them just before Anzac Day this year.
Obviously things change very quickly.
Is there a way that you can think of to support
Treasury and obviously the Minister of Finance around that forecasting where you
can get it a little bit closer towards the date of budget, through a supplementary
information or something else that you could table?
I'll just note, and I will let you speak to it, Mr.
Secretary,
but I would note that it was quite unprecedented that the Treasury this
year left the final forecasts as late as they did, that
they chose to reopen them-
Usually sets itself
... in order to have the forecasts reflect the best information available
in the market at the time.
And so the Treasury, I'd like to give credit to, were very
willing to, as much as possible, fast-track their production processes and
other processes to reflect the best information available at the time.
But, I'll let you speak on that as to the truth.
Yeah, and I think, if I speak to both the specifics, if
we had
by the time we got to budget day-
Mm
... for example, oil prices were a little bit higher than we
had assumed in our forecast. But in the big scheme of things-
Within the contingency forecasted
... not materially. I think the more general point
is, whenever you cut off, you're always going to be
cutting off before budget day. And that's where I think the scenario
analysis becomes important because there are
always things that are happening in the economy, and certainly this committee
knows
we think our future is a more shock-prone world.
And for that reason, I think that the scenarios are actually
really important to actually give a sense of some of those
uncertainties.
So as part of those scenarios, and again, they
were from April- Yep ... obviously when the cutoff, when the embargo,
moratorium started. Is there a potential where if, say,
certain... Obviously, Parliament can do whatever they want.
But if there were certain criteria met that it would allow Treasury to have an
additional supplementary forecast just to
provide that greater certainty? Because to your point, and to the minister's
credit, there was a lot of shade, say shade,
drawn on Treasury around those forecasts, but you were obviously trying the best
that you could at the time. But do you think there is potentially it would be
helpful if there was a mechanism for Treasury to have, when certain
criteria are met, an ability to provide supplementary information- Well-
... budget? There's nothing to prevent-
There's nothing-
There's nothing to prevent Treasury doing that right now, and in fact what you saw
me do in response to the Middle East crisis was I held
updates with the New Zealand media to provide them scenarios of what
we thought the increase in the global oil price meant for our
forecasts and the economic position.
So there's nothing to prevent- But that's different- ...
any Minister of Finance from taking that choice. I don't think that is different.
But that's different on the Budget Economic and Fiscal Update.
Well, it's exactly that. It's exactly- Which would prevent, for example, a Minister
of Finance saying, a new Minister of Finance saying, oh, they were overly
optimistic. No. What- Those aren't exactly the words that Treasury used.
But of course, a BEFU is different from economic
forecasts because a BEFU also- Budget Economic and Fiscal Update ...
takes into account fiscal decision making.
And it's still budget, and it's still economic as well. Yeah.
And so in terms of the Treasury's ability to provide updated economic
forecasts, there's nothing to prevent them from doing that at the
discretion of the minister. And also note that the New Zealand-
At the discretion of the minister ...
public has
regular opportunities to see revised forecasts from the Reserve
Bank, who provide revised forecasts at a very regular
interval. Okay. So to that point, it's at the
discretion of the minister.
Well- That is the difference ... well, there are statutory minimums that the
Treasury must meet in terms of its EFUs, its half-year updates, and its
BEFUs. And as the Secretary has pointed out,
the Treasury has, as a matter of practice in recent times
under my watch, provided much deeper scenario
analysis of how those forecasts could vary depending on
different events, both positive events and negative events, and they provide
those in the EFU documents. It's also the case that at any time,
the Treasury can be asked to provide an updated estimation
of the forward economic picture, and I've shown willingness in recent
times to do that. So the shade that-
Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
The shade that Treasury received then-
No, Barbara. No, Barbara
... could have been avoided.
I'm going to leave it there. We've got a new primary from Megan.
Thank you. Just going through the supplementary
estimates, in terms of this, there seems to
be
quite a big chunk of the saving
being
achieved because of delays in capital spending.
There's a large number that have been pushed into different time periods.
So just for example, we've got the Regional
Infrastructure Fund, that's 257 million.
The KiwiRail Holdings, 203 million that's
being rephased in there. What is the total
value across the budget in terms of the
supplementary estimates compared to the '25/6
estimates in terms of rephased spending?
Well, I think I'd just make an overall point,
which was made very compellingly in the Infrastructure Commission's
report, which I'm very pleased to see we have pretty broad
cross-parliamentary support for,
that New Zealand has a track record of not
well business casing, choosing, and delivering
public infrastructure projects.
And what that has meant over successive years and successive
governments is that there has too often been a delay
between funding being appropriated for an infrastructure project and that
infrastructure project being delivered.
A couple of cases in point that come to mind for me,
you'll remember the big song and dance about sewage down the walls at Middlemore
Hospital. Well, that project ended up commencing
under our government. Despite the funding being apportioned
under the last, it didn't actually get underway.
A second example is that of Dunedin Hospital, where again,
various commitments were made under the last government to get that project
going, but it became quagmired in the design and development
phase. And so a real focus for our government
has been how do we ensure that when we fund, that is apportion in
a budget, the capital funding for an infrastructure project, that infrastructure
project is actually deliverable.
And going into this year's budget,
that was a real focus for me in selecting which infrastructure
projects we would fund, was querying ministers as to whether
they were deliverable,
and when they would expect actually that spades would be able to get in
the ground. So what's material there is, is it consented?
Is the business case ready?
Do we think that it is able to be delivered?
And so the point that the member's making, I broadly agree with, which
is that there has been an ongoing challenge across government,
across many agencies, where the government votes money for a particular
infrastructure project, but actually the readiness isn't there sufficient that it
is delivered in the time that we would have expected.
And so that is something we're working very hard in the infrastructure system to
fix up
Appreciate that explanation, Minister.
But across all votes in this budget and the
supplementary estimates that have been delivered with it, how many capital or
major operating projects have been delayed, down-scaled, paused, or
canceled since the-
So are you talking about operating projects or capital projects?
I'll just give you the question.
Are you reading something out?
So-
Because I'm happy for you to submit it as a written question.
No, I'm reading the notes I wrote. Since the '25/'26 main
estimates. If you don't know the number, we can submit it as a written
question, and you can get it to us.
Sure.
But in terms of the saving-
It's just that you've conflated operating and capital, which are two obviously very
different things
... Okay. Well, I'll do it in two separate parts.
Great.
In terms of the capital projects, how
much of the savings that are in here as a
result of delayed, deferred, or down-scaled projects?
I'm very happy to come back to you in writing.
What about in terms of operational expenditure?
Very happy to come back to you in writing.
Okay, just a couple of other supplementaries,
Mr. Chairman. One of the things that I'm really interested in
is the very large increase, the $450
million increase,
to the buffer for unappropriated
expenditure that's put into this.
It's around a 25% increase-
Yeah
... that's in there. I think the committee would welcome some
understanding of why we've got this 25% increase
in that unappropriated spending.
We all know unappropriated spend is-
I've got an answer for you if I think I understand your question,
which is to do with the imprest and supply between budgets.
Mm-hmm.
And essentially what that relates to is a technical challenge, and
I'm looking behind me at the right Treasury person, which is essentially because of
our decision to set up the school property entity for
delivery of school property infrastructure.
What that involves is a transfer in the government books,
which requires imprest and supply, even though the
Crown's actual fiscal position doesn't change.
It does require an imprest and supply change.
But I wonder if there's anyone behind me who would like to
explain that better.
Because it's not just school property.
It's across a range of-
That is the key. That is absolutely the material thing that has changed-
But it-
... the requirements on imprest and supply
... it's listed out as across a range of votes.
I'm not sure which, what-
Okay. I'll pop them to you as written questions.
Okay.
And you can come back to us with the detail on that.
The other thing I'm interested in is just understanding
what it is, the change in terms of the
superannuation.
Mm-hmm.
The superannuation change, the way that it's being accounted for in the budget.
Yeah. So there's a couple of different things going on there.
If I-
It's the $103 million decrease.
Sorry, what are you referring to? So if I refer you-
From the supplementary estimates.
There's the New Zealand Super Fund contributions, a decrease
of 100 and-
Okay. So as the member is very aware-
Yeah
... the formula for-
... the contributions to-
Yeah
... the New Zealand Superannuation Fund and the withdrawal timeline is set
in law.
Yep.
The government has made no changes to that law, and we have made no
discretionary decisions which go beyond that law, other
than the decision to ensure that some of the contributions last
year went towards the Elevate Fund, specifically under the
supervision of the Guardians. So-
So the reason cited in the-
So this will all be related to the legislative formula-
Yeah
... as my point.
Yeah, so that's my question, Minister.
So the reason cited
in the documents is reflection of funding profile calculation based on
legislation. What changed?
So the key things that changed this year, because members will have
observed that there was actually a really significant change this year per the
legislative formula.
Yeah.
Which is that last year we were predicting that we would soon be making
withdrawals from the New Zealand Superannuation Fund, whereas this year, we're
forecasting we won't be making withdrawals until 2054.
And the reason is twofold. One, demographic.
More older New Zealanders than had previously been forecast to be the case.
The second
is to do with the rate of return, which the Guardians have agreed to.
They've essentially downgraded their rate of return on the Super Fund
at the margin.
Mm-hmm.
And that is because when they look at the rate of return they have got in
recent years, large amounts of that have been driven by significant lifts
in US equities, in particular the Magnificent Seven, and they have
formed the judgment that that level of return is unlikely to be sustained into the
future, and therefore in line with the choice of many other funds around the
world similar to the Super Fund, have reduced their return
assumptions. And that therefore feeds into the formula, the legislative formula,
and impacts their estimations on the size of the fund, and therefore when
withdrawals will happen and how many contributions need to
occur. It is the case, just for fleet members, that
the way that the formula works for the Super Fund is pretty
opaque. There's one really smart person at Treasury who can explain it
really well, and if colleagues ever wanted a briefing from them, I'd
encourage them-
Please write in
... to take it up.
Yeah.
Because the fact that it can vary so significantly that last year we
were predicting withdrawals, and this year we're saying it won't be happening till
2054-
Yeah
... is pretty dramatic, and it's because small changes at the margin can really
significantly impact that profile.
Great. Just the other very technical question around the supplementary estimates
too, was the actuarial assessment of the Crown's liability to
the Super Fund.
Mm-hmm.
There's a 21% decrease
in the appropriation there. Can you explain to us why that is?
Does someone from Treasury want to help me out with that?
We'll come back to you.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. We had a question, a supplementary on Super with-
Yeah.
David Wilson. Yeah, and I no longer need a primary.
Oh, that's very kind.
On superannuation,
really intrigued by the formula. Given that we've got a
cohort, basically boomers, moving through in the next
30 years.
Mm.
And so contributions to support that cohort not happening till
2054-
Mm
... does that seem like a good idea?
Yeah. Look, it's interesting when-
When the fund was established, I think it was understood that it was meant
to be a smoothing mechanism to recognize the fact
that today's taxpayers are both
supporting superannuitants who are currently in the system,
but are also paying taxes now to fund the future costs of
superannuation.
And
it is, I think, worthy of reflection that actually this
generation of taxpayers won't be benefiting from the super fund,
because we won't be making withdrawals until 2054.
And
that reflects the fact that the fund is never intended in the legislation
to be exhausted. It's actually a 40-year rolling fund, so it just
keeps going into the ether.
Yeah, supplementary. I don't think I was talking about it being depleted-
Sure
... at all. Just talking about the weight of contributions that would be in line
with the demographic changes.
Well, to be fair, the formula that is in the act
is intended to
reflect demographic changes as they occur and require
greater contributions from the Crown to reflect that, and to
set withdrawals that the Crown makes in relation to that demographic picture.
So that is intrinsic to the formula.
But as this year very clearly illustrates, small
changes in that demographic profile, small changes in the
return profile, can significantly impact on the
contribution and withdrawal profile.
Thank you.
Last supplementary.
No.
Just a quick primary.
Okay, we're going to go to Todd Stevenson.
So I know, and thank you, Minister.
You've probably gone a bit over time, but I want to thank you for being here.
Well, we've talked a bit about the forecast that Treasury had to put together-
It was
Two hours
...
in,
with the Middle East crisis going on.
Yeah.
Yeah. But obviously, I'm an optimistic guy, so in the last 48 hours-
Amazing
... I think we've seen hopefully some resolution to that.
Mm.
What can New Zealanders expect to see over the next year, do you think, in relation
to the New Zealand economy, and our prospects going
forward, particularly if peace holds in the Middle East?
Yeah, look, there is just
absolutely it is the case that the news in recent days is
very good news for every New Zealander.
Because what we've seen happen already is the international
price of oil fall significantly. It was under $80 when I
checked today. I start each day checking on the price of Brent
Crude. And the reason I do that is because it is so material
for this economy.
Mm.
Number one, that's what determines the price you pay when you go to fill up,
whether you're a household or whether you're a business.
Number two, how much people are paying for fuel affects inflation
across the economy, which is obviously something that we all want to
see staying on target and not going out of band.
Because when it goes out of band, that's when we get massive upward cost of living
pressure. Number three, that inflation trajectory
then determines the monetary policy response that the Reserve
Bank takes, which is to say, when inflation's more under control, they're less
likely to increase interest rates, which is so material, not
only for New Zealanders with mortgages,
but also for businesses thinking about borrowing to invest in the next
construction project, the next development, the next expansion.
So what I want to see is lower global oil prices because
that means less inflation here at home. It means lower interest rates here at home.
And fundamentally, it means more growth, particularly
because lower oil prices have an impact for the entire global economy.
And when the rest of the world is growing faster, that is good for a small
exporting country like ours. So I too am buoyed
by recent developments. It's also the case that what we have seen
in recent months is that good news can be very quickly taken away,
so I'm not counting my chickens yet.
But materially, they've been very positive developments.
Thank you.
We've got a supplementary from Tom Rutherford.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Budget 2026 contained a $450
million one-off operating contingency-
Mm
... for possible further targeted temporary and timely
measures in response to the conflict.
Can you just explain why you put this reserve to one side
in this year's budget?
The short answer is we believed it was prudent and responsible.
As the Befu sets out very clearly, Treasury, while they
had one core set of assumptions about what would happen with
oil prices and therefore the economy,
also were very candid that they saw downside risks
in which we would see higher fuel prices, more inflation, more pressure
on New Zealand households. Now,
what we were conscious of was that was dependent on events outside our control,
largely events in the hands of the Ayatollahs and Donald Trump.
And that if there were to be negative developments, that that could have very
material impacts for New Zealanders.
And we wanted to be able to have
further targeted, temporary, timely
responses should they be needed.
And we believed that providing some funds in
reserve for that was the prudent thing to do because in the absence of
doing that, what we would have essentially been saying is, "Cross your fingers.
Let's hope it all goes as planned, and if it doesn't, we'll be whacking it on the
credit card, whacking it on the debt." Which was the approach taken
by the last government, who used any excuse to dial up the spending outside
operating allowances. Our tight, disciplined approach has been to say,
let's allow for that within those tight operating allowances, so that
we can both respond as required, but do so
within a very clear fiscal strategy that is seeking to get the books back in
balance, and reduce the debt burden.
Can I have a supp off that?
And what sort of worsening conditions do you think would need to be met for the
contingency funding to be used?
Well, oil prices going higher than we're forecasting and being
sustained there for some time And therefore, New Zealand is
facing higher prices, more inflationary pressure, and potentially
higher interest rates than was being assumed, with that having material effects
on households and businesses that we believe could be relieved through
appropriate, timely, temporary, and targeted measures.
Thank you. Is that the end of your supplementary?
Yes.
We're doing really well. We're just over halfway. I know.
I'm just mindful you, Ian and Minister, you haven't had a
drink of water, so feel free to
take a drink.
Don't dehydrate.
Mr. Chair.
You can blink.
We're going to go to a supplementary from Barbara, and then a new primary-
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't think I've ever had a select committee chair care so
much for my hydration.
Bonus points for you.
We're going to go to a supplementary from Barbara, and then a new primary from
Chloe in just a moment.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair. Just going back to the original primary from Todd
Stevens and around that more economic, that sort of outlook.
In the two years between quarter four 2023, so when you came
into government, and quarter four 2025, how much has the economy actually grown?
In nominal terms or in real terms?
Real terms.
Again, I point you to our favorite table, Barbara.
Which is on
the back of the BeFo. So if you look at-
I am
... GDP in that table, which is on the very back page,
colleagues,
that shows that nominal GDP
on a...
Sorry.
Real terms, back page.
Real terms.
So in real terms, so if we go to...
Sorry.
Real GDP
in-
I can help.
Real GDP.
2024, it's negative 1.4. In 2025, it's negative
2.1.
So we've got the change set out there.
And as is known to all of us, we've been through a difficult recovery, which
shows that GDP through a production measure
increased 1.1 in '24. We had negative
1.1 for '25,
and are forecasting 1.2% increase for '26.
So according to Treasury, annual GDP
fell by 313 million-
Mm-hmm
... in real terms. On average, that's negative
growth of $428,000,
a bit more than that, every day for two years.
So you have a Going for Growth agenda, and that's been in since last year.
Irrespective of the conflict and the shock that is happening at the moment, which
Treasury forecasts to be short, what exactly in this budget,
therefore, is driving that growth?
Well, in this budget, there's a couple of things that we're sustaining-
1.2%
... which I think may enter political dispatches over the next few
months. Number one, the investment boost tax credit,
which will have a material-
0.4%
Well, you've asked me a question, and I'm going to answer it, and then you can ask
me a supplementary. The investment boost tax credit, which in the judgment of
IRD and Treasury is independent forecasters, will lead to greater
investment than would otherwise be the case, greater wage growth than would
otherwise be the case, and greater GDP growth than would otherwise be the case.
That tax credit is sustained in this budget.
This budget also reflects our decisions in our first budget to
reduce the taxes charged on working people, and it is
my judgment that in the absence of that, we would be experiencing lower economic
growth than is represented in these numbers.
In terms of what our Going for Growth agenda has us progressing over
the forward period, number one, that ongoing focus on
skills and education I think is material to our growth prospects.
Number two, pursuing overseas investment and trade, particularly the India
FTA, is a very positive breakthrough.
But also our commitment to ensuring that inward bound investment can grow New
Zealand jobs and incomes. Number three, ongoing regulatory reform,
particularly in this budget, represented a significant investment
in enabling a resource management system that has far lower
administration for firms, for councils, a far
simpler path to consenting and permitting the development and construction that a
growing economy depends on.
Number four, ensuring that across the board, we are focusing on
a science and innovation system that more closely relates public investment
to the commercial and growth needs of the economy.
And then number five, when I look beyond that overall
picture, I think that fundamentally, having good fiscal management in place,
which sees the Crown not worsening inflation, not worsening
things beyond what they would otherwise be, provides confidence for all those
seeking to invest in this economy and grow a business in this economy.
And if you want an example of that, look across the
Tasman, where decisions to expand the reach of capital
gains taxes have clearly already sent a message to some
businesses that they should be less willing to establish and
grow in that economy.
Well-
Sorry. I'll come back to you. I've got a quick sup from Dan Bidwell on this.
That was personal to sustained growth.
I'll come back to you.
Hey, thanks, Mr. Chair.
Yeah.
We get it. The past has been a tough recovery.
Give us a sense of forward forecast on GDP growth, how New
Zealand compares to other countries around the world in terms of their
forecast growth.
Yeah, well, the thing that these
forecasts and the budget really show is an accelerating
growth picture. So the forecast
GDP growth is 1.2% for the '26
fiscal year, so through to July this year.
But accelerating in the 12 months beyond that to 2.3%, and
then accelerating out to 3.2% in the '28 year.
Now, pick your trading partner to pick the comparison, but it is the
case that that is a materially faster growth pathway than many of the
estimates of the Australian economy.
Great.
A few more questions, then we'll go to a new primary.
Just going back to your
Just going back to your response, Minister.
So investment boost according to Treasury is 0.4% over this
forecast period. So average that out across the four fiscal years, it's
0.1% per annum.
Where's the rest of the growth coming if it's supposed to be forecast at 1.2%?
Well, a lot of the growth is coming from private firms and businesses
deciding that they're confident enough about tax settings,
about the government's fiscal management, about policy and regulatory
settings, that they will decide, independent of me, that
what they want to do is expand their business, buy some new
machinery, expand into a new market internationally, hire some new
staff, expand into another city. Now, those decisions are not my decisions.
Those are the decisions of independent firms, and it is the
case that when they make those decisions, they look outward and they
consider what does the global picture look like?
What do I think is going to happen in this economy?
And we saw very much that when the tariff war started, that
materially affected business confidence.
But they also look inward and they also consider, do I think this is going to be a
stable environment in which to invest and grow?
And so that growth figure represents the view of what
opportunity will be in this economy and what growth it is possible to occur.
So how do you reconcile that, given unemployment figures are expected to go higher?
Well, as I set out in earlier answers to the members' questions, it
is an orthodox economic view that there is an order
of events that occurs. Inflation comes down, interest rates
come down, growth recovers. Unemployment is the
last thing to recover. As I say, a huge driver for
me and why I want to see economic growth recovering and accelerating is that
I know that what comes with that is job creation and lower rates of
unemployment. And it is the case that that, across
any orthodoxy of economic forecasts, will lag economic growth recovery.
Deborah Russell.
Thank you, Minister. So, you've talked about confidence of
businesses to invest given the economic settings and so forth.
Mm-hmm.
And you've also talked about the importance of
science and innovation-
Mm
... to this economy. So I just find those
pretty high-level claims hard to stack up with what something that's sitting
in the supplementary estimates of appropriation, and that's a $25
million reduction in the R&D tax
incentive, which is a downwards forecast, saying that we're not
going to spend as much on it as we were going to.
And that rather suggests that businesses aren't confident at all.
No, quite the opposite. That reflects the fact that we
conducted a statutory review of the
research and science tax credit. And while we are making some
improvements to that in terms of the way that that's paid out, responding to
feedback from those who use it, we think there will be improvements in it.
There were also some anomalies highlighted by IRD
about the way some software expenditure was being used for that
tax credit, and we've made a small amendment there.
But we fully expect that people will continue to access the research and science
tax credit. We think it's a very important part of the tax landscape, and firms can
continue to have confidence that they'll be able to access it.
Okay, I'll test that explanation with the Minister of Revenue later on. Thank you.
Very good. We have a new primary. Chloe Swarbrick.
Public sector job cuts. Could you walk us through the logic, the assumptions,
and the calculations that were necessary to land you on that
8,700? Okay.
Yeah, so the basic logic is that if you look back over time, again, blue and
red governments, we're yet to have a green government. God give me strength.
But if you look back-
You can look forward to it
... over blue and red governments,
then proportionate to the population, the core public service has tended to be
about 1% of that population. Under the last government, there was an
extreme increase in the numbers in the public service, from
around 43 to 67,000.
Sorry, no, I've got that wrong. 43 to 61.
And what that meant was that as a proportion of the population,
core public service was more like 1.2%.
As the member is aware, in our budgets, we have
consistently looked to reprioritize baselines.
We made a very significant baseline reduction in our first budget.
We set caps on contracting and consulting spend.
And even despite making those changes, we haven't seen a significant
reduction in the number of public servants.
In fact, in some areas it has grown.
So our view has been that we need to be quite clear that we
want it in the logic to look more like what it has historically.
We see no reason why, in a modern age with great digital tools
available, why we shouldn't be able to have a core public service
similar to size it's been in the past.
So we therefore projected forward and said, what would 1% of the
population look like? We were realistic.
We said, well, you wouldn't achieve that overnight.
The better way to achieve that would be to give yourself some time to plan for it.
So we set that out-year target. And then what we've said is,
okay, well, how do you achieve that?
Because you can achieve that in small beer ways, or you could
actually provide to the public service the opportunity to take a blank sheet of
paper and say, well, how do we reorganize this thing in a way that leads to less
duplication, less wasted resource, is more sensible.
And it's really clear that 39 government agencies, as we currently
have, makes us stand out from other countries in the world.
It seems like too many. It actually is frustrating both for the
agencies and public servants themselves and for policymakers because you
have a non-joined-up back office, you have duplicated
functions, you have inefficiency.
So in the first instance, we've said to the Secretary for the Treasury, the head
of DPMC, and the head of PSC,
we want you to provide us, based on the input from all of
those government chief executives,
a view on how we could reorganize this, make it a better, more efficient
system And then from that, we expect that there will be a
flow and a reduction in some of the roles that will bring us more back to 1%.
So just to be really clear and to not conflate things there, you're talking about
the basic rationale being the extrapolation of the historical size of the
public service, not looking at, for example, the
application of the efficacy, the capacity of AI
tools.
Well, let's go back even a further step, which is we're
looking at the government books and saying we can't stay in perpetual
deficit. We can't keep growing the debt mountain.
But we know we need to keep delivering in every budget
more resources to the front line of our public services, more resources for our
hospitals, for our primary carers, for our schools, for our
early childhood centers. We need to be investing in more infrastructure.
How are we going to achieve that if a greater and greater proportion of
resource is being sucked out by the back office of the core public service?
We don't think those two things are reconcilable.
So we've said a logical position is to take the size of the core public
service back to where it's been historically as a proportion of the
population. That is the key driver.
What you're asking then about is what are the enablers of that shift, and
one of the enablers is obviously reducing
duplication, ensuring more efficiency, adopting digital
tools, which will include AI, in some instances.
Will those cuts under your government continue to move
ahead if there is-
Mm-hmm
... no guarantee that the capacity of the public service is able to
remain the same?
I take a much more optimistic view than you.
The capacity of the public service has not diminished since it last ran with
1% of the population. In fact-
Mm
... we have incredibly capable people in the public service who believe that they
can deliver more with less, and who have said that actually, if you had
less duplication and less of this,
spaghett that has arisen, frankly under successive governments,
where we've got all of these different agencies and different reporting functions-
Mm-hmm
... and different back offices. If we had less of that and we're more able to focus
on our core job of delivering services to the public in a logical,
lean structure, then that would be a good thing for New Zealanders.
Respectfully-
And I concur with that view.
Respectfully, Minister, I'm not being pessimistic.
I'm just being realistic and trying-
Well, you're talking about the capacity of the public service having reduced, that
somehow they need 1.2% of the population-
No, that's not what I'm saying
... to do what they previously did with 1%.
That's-
I take a more optimistic view. They, like everyone else, are increasing their
productivity, increasing their efficiency, increasing their imaginations.
That's not what I'm saying, just to be clear.
What I am saying is trying to, or rather what I'm asking, I'm trying to probe and
understand whether your transformation plan, which we still don't really have the
details of, will continue if it is, for example, potentially
proven, as we're seeing in much commentary overseas, that AI is not meeting the
transformational potential that it has sold to potentially buy for.
Well, as I set out in my primary answer, this isn't just about AI.
Mm-hmm.
It's actually about reducing duplication, reducing the spaghetti,
using digital tools, modernizing the structures which the public service operates
within.
And you can guarantee that that will not result in a reduction-
But as I said-
... of the public service?
I am very much of the view that the public service, the core public service, is not
less able today than it was a decade ago when
it managed to run at 1% of the population.
I see no impediment to why it can't do that again.
Okay. So for-
Thank you. Last up then.
On the AI point, because this has been raised a number of times, including at the
point of the announcement, who is going to own that artificial intelligence that's
running through the public sector?
Well, we have enabled the public service commissioner to become the
government's chief digital officer, noting that we think that there needs to be
one central point of accountability, for both the procurement of digital
tools, and the frameworks which they rely on.
Respectfully, that wasn't my qu- my question was, who is going to own that AI?
Will we as a country, will the government own that AI and the underlying operating
model and the data and algorithms, or will it be contracted out?
Well, in terms of the AI tools that we adopt, obviously all of
those tools will have to be subject to meeting the privacy
standards, the ethical standards, and the data use
standards, which we will set as a government.
And the reason I'm pointing to the chief digital officer is that we do expect that
responsibility for both setting and ensuring those standards are adhered to
will sit with that one single point of accountability.
Thank you. Sorry, Chloe. There was six ups in there.
Quick supplementary from me. Look, and thank you for your comments around the
public service, and I particularly liked your worry about the spaghetti and
duplication.
Yeah.
We actually had the minister of regulation before us earlier in the week, and he
talked about the regulatory landscape report. I'm sure you're familiar with it.
I think it turned up 68 regulators-
Yeah
... in New Zealand. Is that the kind of foundational information you think can
inform the government's thinking around simplification and getting rid of the
spaghetti of government?
Yeah, look, I think the member makes a good point, and I'm sure that the Minister
for Regulation, highlighted this during his
appearance, that even beyond those 39 departments and
agencies-
Mm-hmm
... we then have quite a spaghetti of Crown entities.
We have an entire local government
infrastructure, and that has led to a real spaghetti in the
regulatory landscape. I think one of the most
significant shifts that we are making as a government is in terms of the resource
management regulatory landscape.
Because at the moment you have dozens of
different territorial authorities interpreting the RMA
in really different ways.
Mm.
So that even within one region, you can have
completely different resource consent requirements in one geographic location than
in another. And a large part of the Minister for Resource Management Reform's
drive is to have actually national standards,
national approaches, and that's why we've made the investment in the budget into
that digitization.
Mm.
So that actually the government can provide tools to all territorial
authorities that mean that that's a standardized regulatory process so
far as possible. Of course, you need some local overlay,
because of just the reality that the environment varies in
Northland than it does in Southland.
But you can massively standardize and streamline those regulatory
processes.
Thank you. David
Thank you, Minister. Just talking about that spaghetti.
And I understand you're not an electorate MP, but you do have an electorate
office.
We have, or at least my office has, and I speak to other colleagues, we
have a number of cases that come back to us
where either one government agency tells the customer or the
client to go to another government agency.
That other government agency tells them to go to that agency, and then both put
their hands up in the air. They say, "You're not entitled to anything." They send
them to our office, and then we refer them to food banks.
How does public service cuts
help that situation, given the pressure that these
government agencies are under, given the workload and the caseloads
that they have, and given the reduction in entitlements that they can help the
New Zealand public with?
Well, look, two points there. The first is, the member makes a point which
is very close to my heart, which is actually our lens as
we reorganize the public service should very much be on
the New Zealander interacting with it.
Yeah.
And at the moment, it is too often the case that it's unclear which
door people should go to, which department they should go to.
Too often the case that they do, you're right, get bounced between different
agencies. Should I be talking to Kāinga Ora? Should I be talking to MSD?
Should I be talking to OT? Should I be talking to Health NZ?
And it should be the case, actually, that where we're trying to get to is it
doesn't matter which door you come through, the service and entitlement
is made to you very clearly. And we should reorganize the public
service in a way that puts the New Zealander using the service first, rather than
the needs of the individual department and their view of where the boundaries lie
between them and the other agency.
I abhor the duck shoving that goes on.
So first of all, I agree with you on that.
The second point which you're making, I think substantively about food
banks. One of the things that we do in this budget is, for the first
time, provide baseline ongoing funding
for the Food Infrastructure network,
which was an initiative started by the previous government, but that was
only ever time-limited in funding.
And that is the network that provides the food rescue services, the
other food infrastructure, so that if you're a local food bank,
rather than having to reinvent the wheel and set up your own bespoke arrangements,
you can work with that Food Infrastructure network to access excess
food, whether that's through a food rescue service or through a
particular entity that's got excess of a particular food product, and you can
access that for local use. And we've judged that that Food Infrastructure
network is a helpful thing to have in place, and that's why we've
baseline funded it.
So just about the food network. Yep, started under COVID, given
the impacts that were happening at the time.
So you're saying that it's now baselined, so is that the only funding that goes
towards
the funding of food banks?
Well, there's also funding, I think, for the next fiscal year
for food banks as well on top of that baseline funding.
But going forward, our position is that the role for government does exist to
have that ongoing infrastructure in place to allow food rescue services and the
like to continue and to be sustained into the future.
And I'm really proud that we've fixed that position, which was the fiscal
cliff left to us by the last government.
And have you spoken to food banks about this? Have you visited them recently?
I haven't visited a food bank recently, but certainly in the past, I've visited
Kaibosh and a number of food banks throughout the country
who are of the view, and I've received correspondence from those,
that the Food Infrastructure network is really important.
I know that Minister Upston has engaged significantly with food banks about the
importance of that network.
And here in Wellington, I know that food rescue services
have made it clear to her that ensuring that they have predictability in that
funding environment is something that they want to see.
Thanks, Hon-
When did you last visit them?
Sorry, we'll go to Dan Purvis. You've had three supps on that, bud.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Just a supp going back to the use of AI.
I'm going to have to say it next time.
Do you have any use cases, examples of
where government has been able to use AI to
deliver more for less? And then, I guess in the forward-looking
program, what are the
use case scenarios that you and your government are looking at to
again apply a greater productivity lens in government?
Yeah. Look, great question. The example that I'd point the
member to is Health NZ now have an ongoing
commitment to be looking at what AI tools they can
do to free nurses, doctors, health practitioners up from
administrative tasks so they can focus more time on care for
patients. And a recent
endeavor that they took on was to use AI
scribes in the emergency waiting room.
And that has been really successful.
They found that it reduced the amount of time they were spending filling in forms
at the computer, updating the information that they were collecting from patients,
and had many hours released that they were then able to spend
actually with patients providing care, which, of course, has a flow on effect of
reducing waiting times for patients and improving the care that they
receive.
Mm-hmm.
Interestingly, the feedback from the nurses, doctors, health
practitioners themselves on that AI tool was incredibly
positive, that they saw it as improving their service to patients,
improving
the enjoyability of their work, and saw it as a good thing.
So I think what that shows you is that there are quite simple
AI tools already available that if we apply them to public
service delivery, actually free up our people on the frontline
to do the thing they come into those jobs to do, which is often to
care for people, not to be tied up in endless admin.
Great stuff. Thank you.
Thank you. Deborah Russell, you had a supplementary?
I do have a supp on this. It just goes back to the
discussion around food banks and the like.
And I guess we funded that food infrastructure during
COVID, which was an emergency,
and amazing work went on right across communities to make sure that people
were fed.
I guess one of the things I
find worrying is that we are now
industrializing or having an industrialized setup for food
rescue and for food banks. So that instead of food banks being very
much an emergency temporary measure, as they were 30-odd years
ago, when churches ran them and like, they've now become part of our
social welfare network, and we actually have
industrialized them to an extent.
So instead of being an emergency measure like COVID, it's now industrialized,
and that seems to be a very poor reflection on how we're
managing the welfare of New Zealanders.
Well, you know what? Philosophically, I agree with you that,
actually in New Zealand, our focus should be on
having a sufficient welfare support system, and I would
argue that we do. We have a very generous welfare support
system in the form of the safety net that exists for those New Zealanders
who are unemployed, who face hardship, who are ill, who are disabled.
We do have in place a benefit system which
ensures that they can access income both for themselves and their
dependents in times of need.
And it has been our judgment that having a network
available so that there is some support for people when they require hardship
assistance is justified. But I think that actually focus on the
core welfare system is appropriate, and which is
why we have not given in to calls from the Greens and at times
your own colleagues, who have said, "Put more money just into food banks."
We've said, well, actually, there's a role in terms of that core background
infrastructure. But overall, let's focus actually on allowing
New Zealanders to be independent,
and allowing them to have sufficiency of income.
Number one way to ensure sufficiency of income, get people into work, which again
takes us back to this discussion. You've got to be growing the economy, creating
adequate incentives for people to enter the workforce, so they're not trapped in
welfare. And ensuring that the welfare system does its job, which is
always meant to help you on your way, not trap you there forever.
With respect, Minister, I've
made a habit ever since I became an MP actually and realized some of the difficult
things going on with
unscrupulous lenders of visiting
budget services and money counselors and the like.
And in the visits I've made,
not just in the last year or so, they've talked about
families, households where there are two adults in work,
and those people are now having to visit food banks.
It seems the work itself
may not-- There's something wrong.
We've got something wrong in the balance of what we're paying people.
So if we've got families that are in work having to access food banks, we've got
something wrong with the structure of the general expenses in New Zealand.
Yeah, look, I fully acknowledge that there are people who find
themselves in very difficult circumstances who are working.
And that is troubling not just to you, but I
think to probably everyone in Parliament.
And that will reflect a range of circumstances.
Sometimes it will be that something completely outside of that family's control has
happened that's created a significant financial setback, whether
that's a large expense that they weren't expecting
landing on their lap, and then them going into debt to be able to fund that
expense, and then that debt cycle emerging, affecting their
ability to access credit, affecting their repayments on a weekly or
monthly basis. That's something that you'll hear budget services say, that
sometimes it's one setback that then sets in chain
an ongoing picture that can be very difficult for people.
It is also the case, of course, that in recent times in New Zealand, that
period of 33 months where inflation was completely outside
of the target band, where it reached that high of over
7%, meant that overall, the cost base for many
working people was accelerating far faster than their wages
were. And that has meant that for our government, we've come in
on a mission to say, well, the first thing you got to do is get inflation back
under control, and then drive real wage growth so that we can close that
gap between what was essentially a significant structural lift in
the cost of living under the last government post-COVID,
and make sure that people feel that they can get ahead again because real wages are
growing faster than inflation. And fundamentally, it's my view
that if you want working people to be better off, you need a situation where you're
making this country more affordable through wage increases that outpace price
increases, and through ensuring that people have the opportunity through their own
efforts to get ahead. So for me, that's about people being able to access
promotions, access new jobs, and again, it's why I come
back to GDP growth, not because I love being a particular place in a GDP
league table, but because with GDP growth comes
more jobs, more real incomes, more opportunities.
And, I, like you,
feel very sympathetic to any family that finds themselves in the position that
they're working hard, but they're still finding it really difficult to get ahead.
Of course, at the moment, wage growth is lagging inflation.
Look, as I've said, we have a real
significant global price shock occurring because of events
in the Middle East, and-
Oh, no, this was happening before.
Sorry. Sorry.
Events before.
We're drifting a bit.
All right, I'll go. If I had it to me.
Megan's got it. Let's talk the last supper on this.
Thank you. Just
going to the supplementary estimates on this issue, I think there's one
line in here that tells a very grim story, and
that's the changes to the job seeker support and emergency
benefit that is in there. Going back to the initial
questions that Barbara asked,
we've seen nearly 100,000 more people who are not in
work, but what we're seeing is there's having to be
$127.6
million additional forecast for people who are on job seeker
support and the emergency benefit.
And one of the other increases additional to that $127 million,
is additional money for people needing higher average
payments per person. So I think this just speaks to the suffering
that is going on out there. How many of the people that are
receiving jobseeker and emergency benefits are also
receiving hardship assistance or food grants?
Well, clearly that's a question for the Minister of Social Development at her
estimates hearing. But I find it very difficult-
Sorry, Minister
If I could continue, Mr. Chair. I find it very difficult to
reconcile the member's position as reflected in that current
question with the constant calls from her and her
colleagues that we should increase supplementary support to beneficiaries.
So you can't have it both ways. You can't both say you need to be
increasing the rate of benefits, which you argued for when you said that they
should be indexed to wages, not inflation.
You need to not reduce temporary additional support payments that are available.
They should be more generous. And then also say that when we see evidence that
temporary additional support to beneficiaries is being increased, we'll also
critique that. So make up-
I'm sorry.
Make up your mind.
Last supplement.
No, I think you misunderstood, Minister.
I think you may be misunderstanding things.
The point that I am noting is the number of people that are forced into the
position of relying on this. I just wanted a breakdown
so we can understand the suffering that is out there of how many people
who are receiving this
increased expenditure that you're having to account for because of the number of
people that are out of work in this country are also receiving
additional support or food grants.
It's not I'm critiquing the approach, I'm wanting to understand, and with all due
respect, this is your responsibility as Minister of Finance.
It's in the supplementary estimate.
So, there are two things there. The first is, yes, you are
right. The welfare entitlements which we have in
place as a government mean that while people are able to access base
benefits,
they are also able to, in some clearly
regulated circumstances, access additional support,
where they have significant changes in their material position.
It's also the case that the supplementary estimates reflect
the costs of those payments. And I think it is appropriate, Mr.
Chair, that if the member wants to ask more questions about the benefit system
and its operation,
the numbers underlying those figures, then that is a matter for the social
development estimates.
Thank you. We're going to go to a new primary now from Tom Rutherford.
Great. The budget had a capital expenditure package of around
$7 billion of new capital spending, offset by about $1.3 billion
of savings for a net capital impact package of
$5.7 billion. How did you decide on the amount of capital?
Well, look, what we saw in this year's budget
was a real commitment by this government to
continue our investment in the infrastructure pipeline.
There has been discussion across the parliament and across our business and
wider community about the need for New Zealand to have a longer-term
approach to funding infrastructure.
So on becoming government, we set about
determining those long-term plans.
So in education, we've set a multi-year plan for what investment's
required. In health, we've done the same.
Across a number of government agencies, we've required a sense of what does the
pipeline look like.
Then we've set, as I discussed with opposition members earlier,
some clearer requirements around the circumstances in which we'll fund
infrastructure. So clearer requirements for business cases, for
consenting, for deliverability.
When we then looked at the overall capital demands coming into this year's
budget, we wanted to square up those long-term pipelines with what was
deliverable, what had good business cases,
and what was still achievable within our debt ceiling.
And that is what ultimately determined the shape of the overall capital
budget.
Some people say, "Well, you should just invest
whatever you want in capital, that it's fine to borrow for
capital." There are two real constraints on that, and we've experienced them
in recent times. The first is you can get into a situation if you over-commit to
capital, that you end up just inflating the cost of construction.
There's evidence that that occurred under the last government,
but also you get delays in construction because actually there's
not readiness to deliver that infrastructure. So there are limits there.
The other very material limit is around debt.
So, while capital is neutral for the
overall ex position,
it's also the case that it does add to the debt profile.
And so, as you know, we've set that goal of getting the debt curve
bending down, and we have to make sure that our capital allocation decisions are
consistent with that.
Can you just highlight some of the projects included in the capital expenditure
program?
Yeah. Look,
very much making material progress on our health infrastructure
pipeline. So you're seeing a new tower block for Whangarei
Hospital. And I give tribute there to Dr.
Shane Reti, who has argued for that for many, many years.
The next stage of work to redevelop our regional provincial hospitals,
Tauranga,
Palmerston North, Hawke's Bay,
as well as other work to continue infrastructure development for health facilities.
Significant investment for education, both to enable new classrooms,
the redevelopment of multiple schools across the country that are worn out and old
and need redevelopment. Purchasing of land in high-growth areas to allow for new
schools
to be developed.
Then significant investment in transport infrastructure.
In particular, we made a decision to
directly accelerate and fund road and resilience projects
needed in areas that have become highly affected by weather events, where we
just don't think it makes sense to keep rebuilding those roads and billing the
taxpayer for that. Let's actually strengthen them now, make them more resilient to
future weather events. So $400 million invested in those projects across the
country. As well as putting the funding commitment to
allow the very, very much delayed, much talked about
extension to the Waikato Expressway to happen, the Cambridge to
Piarere extension. That's one of the most unsafe stretches of state highway in the
country, as the member from Tauranga will appreciate.
Sorry, Bay of Plenty, but you know the Tauranga region, I mean.
That road, on average, has some sort of disruption or closure every 10
days, and that is ridiculous on a piece of road that is so important
to the country's productivity.
And also has literally meant the loss of life
for New Zealanders and their families.
So we're very proud that we've committed that additional funding to getting that
road going. And then, of course, there's also a chunk of capital there for defense
People often highlight the kit that we're buying from offshore, and yes, that's
part of the capability, but actually a significant part of this year's
investments are also in the facilities that we ask our
servicemen and women to live and train in.
And these are men and women who literally put their lives on the line for the
country, and I think they deserve to live in
housing of a basic standard and to train in facilities that are basic
and meet their needs. So, investment there.
Two other projects were new police stations in Greymouth and-
Yes, sorry, I didn't mention the courthouses and the police stations-
Yeah
... and various other things, yeah.
But with police stations in Greymouth and Wanganui-
Yes
... in particular. Why was it necessary to upgrade those facilities in those
communities?
Yeah. In line with our long-term infrastructure pipeline planning approach, we
asked the New Zealand Police to go away and give us a picture
of which police stations across the country need to be
remediated, need to be replaced, and to have a much more logical
pathway for how that's happening, rather than a really ad hoc approach.
They've done a really good business case on that, and very clearly, the
next two cabs off the rank in highest need were Greymouth and
Wanganui. And therefore, based on that business casing and that
pipeline work, that's where we've provided additional investment.
And frankly, our police deserve it, as do the people who
use those police stations.
Quick sub, Nancy Lou.
A very, very quick one. Minister,
the big numbers, the big amounts for the capital projects are exciting, and it
provides a lot of guarantee and assurance for
the construction community. But what does it
translate to day-to-day New Zealanders in terms of certainty for
jobs-
Mm
... and commitment into growing that career?
Yeah. Look, I think the first lens is always,
what are the infrastructure needs that we have in order to
have both the delivery of good public services and the
enablement of a good, productive economy. And that's number one.
So for me, actually having adequate hospital
facilities is pretty core to the delivery of health services, adequate places for
our kids to learn and those things.
And then the secondary layer on that is actually when we're
building that infrastructure and developing that infrastructure, as you say, that
provides jobs, incomes, contract opportunities for New
Zealand firms and New Zealand households.
And so, I think for your average Kiwi, what they will see
in many, many communities across the country is they will see people in hard
hats and hi-vis with spades in their hands and jobs
building infrastructure for the future.
Infrastructure for the future that will improve public service delivery in the
future, will strengthen our economy for the future, but is providing real
jobs right now. And I had this highlighted to me by
someone the other day who lives in the Hutt, actually, and they were saying, "Yeah,
I really
can feel that happening," because of course they drive past the Melling development
regularly. And that's of course about flood protection, but also about a better
roading network. And when you can see that investment happening in your community,
I think it's heartening. The opening of the shared path here in Wellington,
again, people can see things are getting better on an infrastructure basis.
But there's a long list of needs, so we need to make sure that when we make those
investments, we're really careful about how we prioritize them, how we sequence
them.
Fantastic.
Thank you.
Thank you. We'll go to a new primary now from Dr. Deborah Russell.
Oh, thank you.
Mr. Chair, it's 11:04. So-
It's a shortie.
Sorry?
It's a short one.
Well, we're due to finish at-
I thought we finished at 11:15
... 11:15.
Oh, 11:15. Okay.
So last-
It's a long session, isn't it?
Last 10 minutes.
So it's a really interesting one. There's a capital injection to the Natural
Hazards Commission-
Mm
... for business case development-
Mm-hmm
... which I'm just really interested in.
So it's for a-
Thank you for this question. I'm very interested in this too.
Me too.
Delighted.
So it's a business case for a public infrastructure risk
management scheme for The Crown.
Yeah.
So I'm interested in
the thinking on this, because it's something that needs to concern us all on an
ongoing basis. So, the Natural Hazards Commission, Toka Tū Ake,
at the moment it's really for individuals.
It
covers that insurance gap for individuals and gets insurance going.
So putting this,
I know it's only a business case, but I'm just interested in this thinking around
the
public infrastructure
sitting in there.
Mm-hmm.
And also whether you think that might extend, obviously,
government infrastructure, but what about local government infrastructure and
things like that?
Mm.
So I'm just interested, Minister. I'd love to hear about it.
Yeah, great question. So essentially, the
Crown owns a huge amount of assets
that are insurable assets, whether that's your roads, your railways, your
hospital buildings, your schools.
Right.
And what we have at the moment is an absolute
spaghetti-
Yeah
... when it comes to how we approach insuring and managing those
risks. So in some cases, it will be appropriate for a government agency to
say, "Well, we just put our own money to one side to ensure that we could
replace those assets if there was an extreme weather event, an earthquake or
something." In other
cases, they buy an insurance policy.
The level of that insurance varies markedly from one agency
to another. The tally also is that we have around 100
different insurance policies across government, which I think shows
you that we've got really quite a haphazard approach.
Mm.
And so what we see in other jurisdictions, particularly in Australia
but elsewhere, is that they pool all of
that risk financing together into one place to have more of a
uniform risk appetite for the Crown, to have a more centralized
view of overall assets and risk, and therefore to
take an insurance approach accordingly, either through buying external insurance
products or having their own internal insurance pool.
And so what that business case that we've funded NHC
to do is about, is saying to them, "Okay, go away and have a look at the current
arrangements.
Have a look at how others do it around the world, and come back to us with a
business case as to whether or not it is worthy of
changing our approach, that we would get net benefit to the taxpayer out of doing
that, and give us some views on what that would look like." To the second part of
your question,
in time, could you expand that to also include local government assets?
Yes, you could, but we'll do the first bit first.
Great. I'm really interested. I'll be quick Let's see the business case.
But I guess I won't at this stage. But, I'm really
pleased to see this sort of thinking going on.
I guess there's another set of stuff that's going to sit in around
there around some of the
emergency stuff we do.
Mm-hmm.
So I think the stat is that we spend a
hell of a lot on recovery from emergencies-
Yes
... but not a lot on actually adapting to it in advance.
Is that some work that's going to sit in that space too, or is that going to happen
also?
Yeah, look, absolutely, you're right.
So the approach, again, of different agencies to that
question varies significantly.
Mm.
So
one of the anomalies that gets pointed out to me is that KiwiRail fully insure all
of their rail so that they replace it no matter where it is or how used it is,
whereas NZTA take a more circumspect approach to how
they insure their road. But also, you see
variability in that approach around emergency works versus
taking steps in advance to protect assets
from requiring emergency works. And all things
being equal, if you have a really good asset register, you have a really
good assessment of risk, i.e., how likely are these assets to
be impacted by seismic events, weather events, other events.
Therefore, what is the benefit to risk ratio of
investing now versus paying for an insurance product that
invests later? You should be able to make much more logical and
rational decisions.
Yeah.
But my thesis has been because we have such a disparate approach from one
agency to another and not a clear risk appetite
overall, not even a clear view of the data that should inform these decisions,
that we haven't been as able to prioritize those
investments as I would like us to be.
So having a centralized risk management approach, which the NHC
business case is looking at, would allow us to make much clearer whole
of government decisions about when we invest preemptively versus
when we invest after the fact.
Yeah. It's interesting because obviously it's not going to be one size fits all
because thinking of the case of KiwiRail versus NZTA-
Absolutely. It's not going to be the same-
Yeah, but a break in the-
... but at least you can have a similar risk appetite.
Yeah. A break in the rail network can shut the whole thing down-
Exactly
... but a road network can usually work around it.
Yeah. No, that shouldn't have been taken as a critique of the approach.
It's just pointing out there are different approaches.
Yeah. That's right. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. That's really interesting.
Another quick one from Chloe.
For our country, economy, and democracy, Minister, do you believe that extreme
inequality is a bad thing?
Yes.
So based on your response to my questioning in December 2024,
you said that you believe that you, at your job, is to have a
significant role in reducing inequality.
Mm-hmm.
How exactly have you done that?
The number one thing we've done is improve the performance of our education system.
The number one thing any government can do to liberate a
child from their family circumstances, which they inherit and have no
choice over, is to ensure that when they're at school between the hours of 9:00 and
3:00, that they are getting a decent education.
We cannot control what every parent does in every home.
We cannot control what spending choices parents make.
We cannot control what parenting choices they make.
But what we can do is ensure that no matter what home you were born in, when you
turn up at a school in New Zealand, you get a decent go at
getting literacy skills, numeracy skills that are needed for you to contribute
to our community, for you to get a job, and for you to enter further training.
And frankly, in recent years, we've done far too poor a
job of that. Too many kids, particularly the kids from the poorest homes, have been
left behind by our education system.
And I think the number one thing that our government can do to address that is
ensuring that we are giving every kid an hour a day of reading, writing, and maths,
that they are getting access to the structured literacy and numeracy approaches
that work, that the teachers that are teaching them are getting the professional
development that allows them to take those approaches, and that we are measuring
ourselves against whether kids are learning more.
And so I think Erica Stanford's education reforms, and the success
that they are having, is one of the biggest things we can do for long-term equality
in this country.
I just respectfully, Minister,
we have the most people unemployed since I was born, and they are staying
unemployed for longer. We also have 50,000 more children living in material
hardship than three years ago, and we also have decisions under your
last budget for 129,000 households in social
housing to be approximately $24 per week worse off.
Do you not accept what all of the international and domestic research shows
that per your point on education being the pathway out of poverty, that it's
actually incredibly difficult for children to learn when they are in impoverished
circumstances, which is exactly what your budgetary decisions have created?
I believe children, when given the ability
to be educated well, have the potential to go
well beyond the circumstances into which they are born, and there are examples of
that from all over this country, all over the world.
Kids born to the most difficult circumstances that are
educated well, and actually often also have a mom or a dad or a
caregiver that
says that they are capable of anything and supports them to be capable of anything,
who overcome their circumstances.
And that optimism about the ability of people to shape their own individual
lives lies at the heart of my politics, and I believe that the
state has a very real role in ensuring that kids
can access a good education. If they can't, we are trapping them in the
circumstances to which they are born forever. So yeah, I stand by my view.
Education really matters, and I have no
time for the bigotry of low expectations that persists on
the left that says, "Well, if you're from a low income home, well, it's just too
hard for you."
That's not what I said at all.
My view is that if we educate kids well, so many young
New Zealanders are capable of overcoming the circumstances which they are born
into.
Thanks, Chloe.
Respectfully, my point was you've made those material circumstances harder-
Sorry.
You made your point, and I've made mine.
Thanks, Chloe.
So, Minister, when was the last
time you went to a food bank?
I'm very happy to check my ministerial diary.
When was the last time you went to a state house and sat down with a family and
spoke to them about their issues?
Minister to chair, I think we've now entered the stunt part of the hearing.
Actually, I have one last question, Minister, if I may.
I reserve the right to the last question.
Aside from getting into surplus a year earlier than forecast, what
key things from Budget '26 can New Zealanders take solace in?
Good reading.
Well, I think the fact that having been hit by a number of curveballs,
from tariffs through to a crisis in the Middle East, we are still seeing this
economy bouncing back strongly because the foundations are in order.
That we can expect accelerating growth, inflation coming back in
band, that we can expect 220,000 jobs to be
created, and that all of that can be achieved while we're also seeing big
steps forward in our public infrastructure and public service delivery,
and that we can see all of that happen without the addition of a wealth tax, a
capital gains tax, or higher taxes on working people.
We are making progress as a country, and the worst thing we could do is
put that all at risk by taking a huge diversion to a government that
would wish to torpedo the surplus, rebuild the debt mountain, and
slather you in more taxes.
Thank you for your time, Minister.
Thank you, Minister.
Thank you.
Members, we're going to have a short break until 11:30.